Mostly gardening at that time. Vegetable
gardening? I tried that with little success. Did
it shift into flowers? No, I never did much with
flowers. Where did you go to celebrate?
Celebrate? I don't remember any celebration.
You know a guy whom I haven't mentioned?
celebration makes me think of it because for some
obscure reason I thought then Mennonite
who the devil was the guy the general who moved into
the office at my invitation oh such a wonderful
loyal person I'm embarrassed that I his name no no
the guy who became head of the health service here
then after he left the dean's office Oh my, that's
really embarrassing. You know the man, he's been
active in Kiwanis or Lyons or whatever, all kinds
of activities around town, very generous, but
from a Mennonite background, I may have the sect a
little wrong, terrible tragedies in his life, two
of his children committed suicide, his wife was a
depressive But he was always of good cheer. He'd
been chief in San Antonio of a hospital down there.
What the devil? Pathologist. Gosh, I've got to
remember his name because somewhere he needs to
get some accolades or recognition or something.
Loyal, warm, kind person. Hard worker. All right.
If you were giving advice to today's
administrators
about the medical school, what advice would you
give them? Well, I'm out of touch, so it wouldn't be
specific. It would be more kind of process. And I
think that, now it depends on the level.
At the level of university administration, I
don't know what you all do when you get together and
talk or when they have those meetings for the new
presidents.
And I don't know the extent to which medicine is
special. For me, it's very special. But I don't
know the extent that it's more special problem or
opportunity for a president than engineering or
whatever. I think the university presidents need
to have much broader understanding, I'm going to
stick with medicine, of medical education in
other institutions. That to me was the most
stultifying thing here, that the people with whom
I was dealing knew nothing about medical
education and didn't want to learn. Now, at the
level of the medical school deans, I really think
there is, although they talk about experiments in
medical education, there is a very active group
called RIME, Research in Medical Education, yet
medical education is frozen into a frame of
reference. And there are very few real
experiments in medical education. One of them,
incidentally, is in New Mexico. which I didn't
initiate, but I fostered and it came out of the
faculty. It's still going on and it's truly
distinguished. But I did nothing except get out of
the way of that. If you were organizing
administratively this institution and its
medical school, where would you place the medical
school administratively? Yeah, that's a
perennial problem. And I think the answer, I guess
it sounds like a pretty soft answer. The answer is
not in the structure. It is in the relationships
among the people. It is not in the structure. Would
you have that report, would it be part of the
university or part of the system? I won't do that. I
won't do that because I don't believe it's
structural, Haskell. I believe that while you
might need to have a table of organization, every
table of organization can and will work. I'm
absolutely adamant about that. I feel very
strongly about it because the debates have been
endless. And one of the problems that my several
successors have had is they have come in with
traditional views about what their prerogatives
were, what the structure should be, and they have
come a cropper. Not just in this university, they
went into another university. I don't know what
you had at Missouri. I visited Missouri when Joe
White was still vice president, and they wanted me
to... Joe White... I feel that I was vigorously,
enthusiastically recruited at Missouri when Joe
White was there. I never told Joe, but what turned
me off and made me absolutely refuse to take that
job was Joe White, when he told me that he wanted me
to come, he said, the first thing you're going to
have to do is fire the chairman of anesthesiology.
Well, that's horse manure. Would you, again, in
this, you're the advisor, you would perhaps
reduce the enrollment a little, class size? Oh,
yes, yes, yes. That would have to be done carefully
for financial political reasons. And that's what
makes faculties anywhere nervous, particularly
state-funded institutions. They figure, well,
somebody is going to look at that cost per student.
The cost per student is going to go up, and they'll
cut our appropriation. Would you modify the
instructional program and add more or less? No,
again, I think that there's been much too much made
of that, of engineering the curriculum and giving
more hours to this or fewer hours to that or saying
that this course has to follow that. I don't think
those are the issues, and yet that's what
preoccupies the faculty. And you would tell the
faculty, keep emphasizing what? I don't want to be
buddies with the students. I don't want the
students to call the faculty by their first name,
categorically.
But they are faculties to teach, and they have
multiple responsibilities. They are faculties
to create, but the students can't be given short
shrift. They cannot, whether it's Harvard or
Texas A&M or wherever. The faculty has to teach.
It's a hard job being a faculty member, tough job. I
wouldn't want it. Should A&M try to do more in
involving local practitioners? No, no. There's a
good mix there you think? I think it would be
tilting at windmills. I think it's wasted effort.
In New Mexico I tried very hard because the medical
practice in New Mexico when I was there was
primitive. And we tried to help people and get them
involved and provide continuing medical
education opportunities. But those old guys are,
and they were guys, not women, are, you know, they
were at the bottom of the class to start with, and
they still are. All right, now, what topics have we
not touched on? That's it, sex.
Let's make believe that at some future date
someone walked up to you and gave you a check for a
million dollars with one restriction. It must be
passed on to Texas A&M. If you could make a very
large contribution to A&M For what purpose would
you want it? A million dollars wouldn't do
anything. A million dollars buys one professor.
If you could make a substantial gift, what would it
be for?
In your gizzard, what are you most concerned
about?
For a while, a national group that I was involved
with was doing something that wasn't unique to
medical education, but leadership development
and serious
attention. I got some of this at the Sloan School,
in fact quite a bit. I did a fair bit of third party
consulting while I was at Sloan School. You
probably know Bennis, Warren Bennis, even
consulted with him, with Paul Lawrence and I went
out to the University of Cincinnati when he was
there and having trouble. What I believe,
I believe that really good
behavioral science, I guess I would say, emphasis
on behavioral science. That's the background
that I got from Harvard and MIT working with Paul
Lawrence who was at Harvard. That's what I think
faculty needs more than accounting or good
business practices or other highly structured
relationships, when one looks at the good
managers in industry, they've been guys who've
walked around the plant, who went down on the floor
and talked to the foreman and the men on the
assembly line. I think what I've seen, I think they
did that. They weren't too proud. And they needed
to know. It was where they got information. It was
where they knew what their organizations were
doing. Can you imagine the president of Texas A&M
University coming over and shooting a bull with
the dean or the students? It doesn't happen. Or the
regents? I'm proud to say that I never missed a
semester teaching a freshman class, early on
Tuesday and Thursday morning. So at least I had a
little bit of real-world experience. All right,
then,
to conclude, in two or three questions, how do you
feel about your years at A&M?
Regretful. What do you mean? Well,
I don't think there's much to show for it. You don't
think that medical school represents some...
It's not a distinguished medical school. It has
some good points, and
I suppose like most universities or whatever,
whatever we have is the best or the greatest, but it
ain't. On a national scale, this is not a
distinguished medical school. And I'm sorry that
that's the case. Could it have become
distinguished in a quarter century? Well,
I don't know. We don't have a controlled
experiment. Perhaps under different leadership
it could have, but that's not the issue that I'm
dealing with. I'm dealing with the reality of what
there is there, and what there is there is a medical
school in the fourth quartile of how you might rank
medical schools in the country. But hasn't it made
more progress than any of the other brand new ones?
I don't think so.
What do you feel about this institution in
general? About what institution? Texas A&M?
that the regents, maybe mostly the regents, that
the former students do not have a
clear understanding
that this is not a distinguished university.
They're kidding themselves. It's not. It's a big
university. It's the biggest in the world as far as
I'm concerned. But you can count the number of
scholars on one hand, two hands, or the number of
distinguished departments, if you look at the
rankings wherever they come from, whether it's
the number of publications or whatever,
it's not of the stature that it should be given the
resources that have been put into it. Are you
shaking your head? That you hear me or that you
agree? No, I'm saying I hear you and I understand
the point you make. Now, do you want to conclude
with that point? What more is there to say? No, I
don't want to conclude with that point because I
don't want that on the record. I don't want anybody
else to see that. Oh, okay. Well, when it's typed up
and we give it back to you. I'll scratch that out.
All right. How would you like this interview to
end, then? What statements would you like at the
end of it?
That's what I thought I was asking when I was
saying, what do you think, how do you feel about
this institution in general?
I think that given the milieu, that is given Texas,
given the Texas heritage, given what
Texas is, that this is about as good as this
university can be. I think in general terms
University of Texas in Austin is a more
distinguished institution and I don't
understand why Texas A&M can't outshine the
University of Texas at Austin. I understand why
we're not as good as Rice. I don't have a problem
with that. I understand why in many respects we're
a better institution than SMU or Baylor.
But why we can't have the student body, of course
turning that around a certain number of people
will say that's the strength of the institution.
We don't have the student body, the grungy hop
potheads or whatever they are at Austin. We don't
have them. That's the strength of this university
for many of the parents, maybe for many of the
faculty, for the regents. And so what I'm saying is
antithetical to exactly what is wanted of Texas
A&M University. It is what the people who have it,
who own it, want of it. This is not the University of
Texas at Austin. Haskell, the last thing I want to
say off the record, I apologize